DSET-3941: Document architecture (#33)
scalyr/dataset-go: docs/ARCHITECTURE.md

# Architecture

This library is under development, and it's primarily designed to fulfil needs of the
open telemetry exporter and therefore some functionality that would be useful in other
scenarios is not implemented.

## Idea

Design is heavily influenced by peculiarities of the upstream and downstream systems
about which I know very little.

### Downstream

The downstream system is DataSet REST API and its API call [addEvents](https://app.scalyr.com/help/api#addEvents).
It has the following properties:

* `D1` - DataSet does not support parallel requesting per session. Only one request for each session could be made at one time

> * `D2` - when new version is deployed there is few minutes outage

Reviewer: Could change it to something along the lines of "When a new DataSet version is deployed, there could be a short window of unavailability of a particular queue server when it's being restarted in a rolling manner. During the restart / unavailability, sessions which are mapped to a particular queue server may be temporary unavailable and those requests need to be retried. Per queue server unavailability should not last more than a couple of minutes (in real life it's < 120 seconds)".

# Architecture

This library is under development, and it's primarily designed to fulfil needs of the
open telemetry exporter and therefore some functionality that would be useful in other
scenarios is not implemented.

## Idea

Design is heavily influenced by peculiarities of the upstream and downstream systems
about which I know very little.

### Downstream

The downstream system is DataSet REST API and its API call [addEvents](https://app.scalyr.com/help/api#addEvents).
It has the following properties:

> * `D1` - only one request for each session could be made

Reviewer: Should probably clarify it that this means that only one request per session can be active at one time (aka no parallel questions per session).

Could also add that this - network latency and RTT (round trip time) can have large affect on the throughput.

Reviewer 2: updated

* `D2` - when new version is deployed there is few minutes outage
* `D3` - maximum payload size for the API is 6MB before compression

### Upstream

The upstream system is [open telemetry collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/),
where the datasetexporter is one of many exporters that could be used
(on the right side of the image). It has the following properties:

* `U1` - data are passed in batches
* `U2` - each batch could be either accepted or rejected, if it's accepted it cannot be returned, if it's rejected, it may be retried
* `U3` - function for accepting batches could be called in parallel (with different batches)

### Consequences

As a consequence of the upstream and downstream system following has to happen (codes
between brackets points to the previous points):

> * `C1` - data has to be grouped to be divided into multiple sessions to increase throughput (`D1`)

Author: Few points about the bullet points:
1. for bullet points is good practice to keep them consistent - https://grammarist.com/punctuation/bullet-points-usage-rules-examples/ - sections - `Keep a Consistent Structure` and `Rules of Bullet Point Punctuation` - and rest is most likely useful as well
2. I was trying to use structure "it does foo, because of bar"

> * `C1` - data has to be grouped to be divided into multiple sessions to increase throughput (`D1`)

Reviewer 2: I see the consistency concerns, lets just change the order 
```suggestion
* `C1` - incoming batch of EventsBundles (logs & traces) has to be divided into multiple sessions, in order to increase throughput (`D1`), 
```
my point is to change group -> divide. Remember these bullet points define system constrains, does not describes the implementation.

* `C2` - data from multiple input batches has to be combined (`D1`, `U1`)
* `C3` - input and output has to be decoupled (`D1`, `C1`, `C2`)
* `C4` - if the downstream returns error, system cannot return data that has already accepted, it can only start rejecting new data (`U2`, `U3`)
* `C5` - since the system cannot return data, it has to handle retries by itself (`C4`)
* `C6` - user has to be able to define the grouping mechanism to achieve maximum throughput (`C1`)

> ## Implementation

Reviewer 2: captured in document, this is DataSet optimazation to publish events grouped by keys at one moment

* `I1` - to decouple upstream from downstream we use pub/sub pattern (`C3`)
* `I2` - there are two levels of pub/sub patterns

>   * `I2.1` - publisher 1 - events from incoming batch are divided based on the grouping into sessions and published into the corresponding topic (`I1`, `C6`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * `I2.1` - BatchDecomposer = publisher 1 - events from incoming batch are decomposed (`C6`) into sessions and published into the corresponding sessionChannels/sessionTopics (`I1`, `C6`)
```

lets be explicit and add example, eg. batch of 6 events is decomposed into 6 sessionChannels? or is the decomposition mechanism more sophisticated?

>   * `I2.1` - publisher 1 - events from incoming batch are divided based on the grouping into sessions and published into the corresponding topic (`I1`, `C6`)

Reviewer 2: Do we have pool of sessions of predefined size where sessions are being reused, or we create new session as we go?

>   * `I2.1` - publisher 1 - events from incoming batch are divided based on the grouping into sessions and published into the corresponding topic (`I1`, `C6`)

Reviewer 2: Based on the code its not session but keys. Session = ClientId + Key

Author: This is really great question!!! 

Since the `group_by` may not be specified or it's mentioning same key referencing the same file - `/var/log/apache/access. log` - it would lead to multiple instances of the client using the same key => breaking the requirement of having single session in progress. Therefore each client has unique key - and then is then combined with the computed key based on `group_by`.

>   * `I2.2` - subscriber 1 / publisher 2 - reads individual events from the topic and combines them into batches, batches are published into the corresponding topic (`C2`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * `I2.2` - SessionBatcher = subscriber 1 / publisher 2 - each SessionBatcher reads individual events from its own sessionTopic and combines them into batches, batches are published into the corresponding sessionBatchTopic (`C2`)
```

  * `I2.3` - publisher 2 - output batch is published even if it's not full after some time period

>   * `I2.4` - subscriber 2 - reads output batches from the topic and calls DataSet API server (`D1`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * `I2.4` - SessionSender = subscriber 2 - reads batched events from the sessionBatchTopic and sends them into DataSet API server (`D1`)
```

* `I3` - each session has its own go routine (`I2.1`)

### Error Propagation

Error state is shared among all sessions. It works in the following way:

* when error is returned from the API call then:
  * system enters error mode
  * internal retry mechanism is triggered
* when the system is in error mode, then:
  * new incoming batches are rejected so that external retry mechanism is triggered
  * internal retry are still happening

> * error state is cleared when:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* error state recovery:
```

>   * some of the internal retries succeeds

Reviewer 2: I assume sessions send batches in parallel. So when SessionA triggers and error mode and no new batches are consumed for any session, but SessionB still may send request (previously published in topics) to DataSet. What if also sessionB request fails as well. And than SessionA retry succeeds. What happens?

`some of the internal retries succeeds` does internal mean session scope? Or any success returns system to OK mode. No matter of SessionB still retries (still in error mode)?

>   * some of the internal retries succeeds

Reviewer 2: I have check shouldRejectNextBatch() which checks client.LastHttpStatus

Is it possible that 

1. SessionA request results into and error
2. SessionB request is successful, so this overrides previous error state in LastHttpStatus?
3. Therefore exporter is recovered no matter of SessionA status is?

Author: Yes. This is true. Error state is shared. We have some call with @czerwingithub and @tomaz-s1 - and I recall that some of the errors are per session (429) but some of them are global (530).

So for now everything is global.

Reviewer 2: Do you consider this as a bug @martin-majlis-s1 ?

Reviewer 2: captured under known issues

>   * it should be cleared after some timeout as well - https://sentinelone.atlassian.net/browse/DSET-4080

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * NOT YET IMPLEMENTED: system recovers from error state after predefined (refer to config) timeout - https://sentinelone.atlassian.net/browse/DSET-4080
```
